Scientists are actively studying the brains of
people with Alzheimer’s disease
in the hope of being able to diagnose it earlier,
or confirm a diagnosis in someone with symptoms.
One test that appears promising
is analysis of spinal fluid for protein fragments.
Alzheimer’s disease produces many changes to the brain.
Among these are the presence of large amounts
of what are called plaques and tangles.
Plaques are formed of protein fragments called amyloid beta.
The fragments accumulate and form hard
plaques between nerve cells, or neurons.
Tangles are twisted fragments of a protein
called tau found inside neurons.
In Alzheimer’s disease,
neurons in certain parts of the brain
become damaged and die.
When the nerve cells die,
fragments from the plaques and tangles
enter the cerebrospinal fluid,
which bathes the entire brain.
The cerebrospinal fluid flows down into the spinal column.
Samples of this fluid can be taken through a
procedure called a spinal tap.
It can then be analyzed for the presence of these proteins.
Another test involving brain scans and a dye
to image plaque in the brain
was recently approved by the FDA.
Not everyone who has these fragments,
or everyone who has plaques and tangles,
will develop Alzheimer’s disease.
But these are important steps towards understanding
more about this devastating disease.